Third-form writers hone their narrative-writing skills and by the end of the year are exploring the fundamentals of essay writing. Working first on sentence- and paragraph- level writing skills, students end the year by writing one- to three-page essays. Throughout the third form year, students explore the question, "How do I disturb the universe?" In tackling this question, students examine closely issues surrounding identity, race, gender, and social class. As they explore others' voices through short stories, essays, poetry, plays, and novels, students strive to acquire fundamental writing, close-reading, and oral skills. The focus of written work is the development of exposition, observation, and description skills. Students discover and develop their respective voices through continuous narrative and expository writing assignments. Critical-reading skills are stressed daily. The concrete elements of writing, from word to phrase to clause to sentence to paragraph to completed work—whether taking the form of a three-part critical essay, a descriptive passage, an emulation, a journal entry, a story, or a poem—receive consistent attention. Grammar and vocabulary are also staples of the third-form curriculum. Texts may include Jesymn Ward's Salvage the Bones, Marjane Sartrapi's Persepolis as well as a collection of short stories and essays chosen by faculty.
Humanities I: Global Studies
Designed to dovetail with the first-year English curriculum, this foundational history course takes students on a journey around the globe and introduces them to a wide range of topics, from European colonization of the Americas and Africa to the Iranian Revolution to the history of modern China. As students survey diverse cultures, religions, and political systems, they gain deeper insight into their own “place identities” and learn to become more engaged and empathetic citizens. Academic skills, such as written and oral communication, critical thinking, collaboration, and research, are a major focus of this yearlong course. Required of all ninth graders, Humanities I is part of a two-year Humanities sequence designed to prepare students for Pomfret’s rigorous upper-level history and social sciences electives.